# TwinCAT – The Windows Control and Automation Technology

Beckhoff switched to the Windows operating system and a new programming philosophy began in 1995. The whole world of automation, from the I/O level to PLC, Motion and CNC, has been at the disposal of the user since the introduction of TwinCAT in 1996. TwinCAT implements the real-time, i.e. the deterministic, virtually jitter-free execution of tasks on the PC with a Windows operating system. Beckhoff has taken care of the real-time development inhouse from the outset and has always kept the know-how in the company’s capable hands. Only the high deterministics of real-time make it possible to accomplish the control of an axis in less than a millisecond on a non-real-time operating system such as Windows XP.

On the basis of real-time, the drivers represent the connection to the outside world for the different fieldbuses. In addition to the Beckhoff fieldbus Lightbus, the first software versions already supported PROFIBUS, CANopen and DeviceNet; over 18 different fieldbus systems are supported today. On account of the concept of mapping between different process images that already existed in the first versions, it was simple to implement the development and integration of new fieldbuses. Each fieldbus has its own process image with inputs and outputs. The same applies to PLC and Motion Control: linking of variables must be carried out between software and hardware. These mappings are then updated in the cycle of the associated tasks, i.e. the values of the variables are copied from one process image to the other. The decoupling of software devices and fieldbuses makes it possible to change from one fieldbus to another simply by “re-wiring” – without having to adapt the software.

The actual application software is usually implemented in the PLC. Programming takes place with the standardized IEC 6113-3 languages. In addition to the two textual languages Instruction List (IL) and Structured Text (ST), the graphic languages Ladder Diagram (LD), Function Block Diagram (FBD) and Sequential Function Chart (SFC) are also available. On top of that, the IEC 61131-3 standard provides a software architecture that can be combined extremely well with the real-time characteristics of the TwinCAT system. The standard defines tasks and programs that can be connected directly to the real-time tasks.

Motion Control under TwinCAT means first of all the complete control of individual axes. Each axis is represented in the software by a virtual axis object, which takes care of setpoint generation, scaling and control. In the case  of simulation – which is always automatically available with TwinCAT – the output values of the axes are set the same as the input values. The axis object also assumes the task of coupling the real axis. Axis objects can abstract different axis types with different fieldbus interfaces. Abstraction layers enable the TwinCAT user to simply switch between different types of axes without modifying the PLC code. The movement of an axis, from the PLC application, can take place in the same way on a servo axis via EtherCAT or on a stepper axis via PROFIBUS.

In addition, further functions are available in TwinCAT for the coupling of axes: linear couplings are realized with the Gearing, non-linear with the TwinCAT libraries “Camming” or “Flying saw.” All of these couplings are controlled from the PLC via function blocks for Motion Control applications, which were standardized by the international organization, PLCopen. Beckhoff actively collaborated in the design of this virtual standard. The worldwide uniform appearance and behavior of these function blocks has led to rapid global acceptance of this standard. Work is currently proceeding on further standardizations.

The ultimate discipline in the field of Motion Control is the movement of interpolating axes, which involves the interpolating movement of several axes in a group. The fields of application are, for example, the classic machining centers for wood or metal, as well as portals and, of course, robots. Two levels are available for interpolation in the TwinCAT system. With TwinCAT NC I up to three axes can be interpolated at the same time and up to five auxiliary axes can be carried along on the path. The programming of the path, i.e. the movement of the axes in space, usually takes place according to the DIN 66025. Here, segments of the path are defined by means of so-called G-commands. However, programming can also be done in the PLC in the case of the NC I system and has the advantage that it is easier to learn for the PLC programmer. With the TwinCAT CNC platform, up to five axes can be interpolated at the same time. The CNC software package provides a series of options that are often used in machining centers, such as transformation functionality and high-speed cutting technology.
 
[Software breathes life into the PC-based controller](http://www.pc-control.net/pdf/special_25_years_pcc/products/pcc_special_0811_software_e.pdf)
