# PC Control – Real-time under MS-DOS

[Real-time processing – the basis for PC Control](http://www.pc-control.net/pdf/special_25_years_pcc/products/pcc_special_0811_realtime_e.pdf)

MS-DOS or PC-DOS (simply referred to as DOS from now on) is a “low level” operating system from today’s point of view. With the help of the PC-BIOS, DOS (Disk Operating System) mainly manages the PC’s hardware resources, such as mass storage devices and interfaces to connected devices. As a “single task” operating system, DOS can only start one program at a time. If another program is to be executed, the one currently being processed must be terminated first. In order to make background functions possible despite that, TSR (Terminate Stay Resident) provides a “back door” to leave small auxiliary programs in memory after terminating the program. These TSR programs can be brought to “quasi life” using interrupts. Examples of this are PC remote control programs, which allow access to a DOS-based computer by modem.

Beckhoff developed its first DOS-based software PLC solution in 1988 under the designation S1000. The further development for software-based PLC/NC/ CNC with a user interface in one program followed in 1993 with the S2000 software.

The S2000 software distinguished between three task levels: the NC task with the highest priority, followed by the PLC task and the foreground task and the user interface, which was executed in the remaining available computing time of the PC. The changeover between the task levels was accomplished via a scheduler, which was called by the timer interrupt in adjustable integral multiples of one millisecond. The NC function had priority over the freely programmable PLC function. The PLC consisted of one task, which could be programmed by the user in an S5-IL dialect. The sensors and actuators of the controlled machine were read in or output via Beckhoff’s Lightbus network.

The S2000 foreground task consisted of cooperative multitasking, which made user inputs in parallel to background functions possible, thus removing the single-task limitation of the DOS operating system. The visual display of the user interface was implemented by textual graphics with 80 x 25 characters and an ASCII character set. DOS was used for the administration of the PC operating equipment and essentially for data storage in mass storage devices.
